Inevitably when you list your project you're going to run into the question of whether or not you should
do a fixed rate or a per hour project.
Most studios you'll talk to will prefer a per hour because they understand that most projects will always
have things that slip through the cracks things that aren't listed out in the specifications for the
project and they get paid on a piecemeal basis to cover the entire project.
That's a little bit idealistic I would say because most people who list their projects are not going
to want to just have an open ended budget like that they're not going to want to say yeah a hundred
dollars an hour until it's finished because I can get out of hand very quickly.
And you kind of need to rely on the expertise of the freelancer or the firm to tell you how long this
is going to take and then you want them to stick to that timeline.
So what are the pros and cons associated with fixed cost and per hour projects with a fixed cost.
Obviously the biggest pro is that you can save a lot of money when people give you a fixed cost.
It is inevitably going to be lower than what it actually would cost per hour mainly because they know
that when they give you a fixed cost price you're comparing against other people.
And so they have a very strong incentive to keep that number down obviously be aware of people who pitch
you prices that are abnormally low that means are probably cutting too many corners and they're assuming
this is a lot smaller of a project and it probably really is.
But the biggest cost savings come from fixed price projects.
Now also an advantage of fixed price is that you can know going into it what exactly your budget should
be.
If they say that your projects and it costs $2000 or a thousand dollars that is a good indication of
what your budget should be.
However always keep a contingency fund just in case there are things outside of the scope of the application
that you're going to need to rehire the freelancer or the firm to go back and add.
Now the biggest con to the fixed price project in my eyes is the negative incentive structure that it
creates.
Let's say that you've engaged with a firm to build your application.
Now if they said it's going to cost $800 that is the pre-agreed amount.
Now how did they get to that $800.
Well for them they're going to try as much as possible to cut costs when in the middle of the project
if they see something that's a cry for extra effort they're simply going to ignore it because they want
it to be exactly around that $800.
And it gives them a huge incentive to go below eight hundred dollars so that they can have a profit
line.
This is not the case with freelancers However they will do the same thing.
They budget in their head how long this is going to take.
That's how they calculate your fixed price.
And when it goes over that amount of time you can find some really negative things will happen.
The freelancer might cut back on the amount of time they're dedicating to the project.
They might start delivering lower quality code all of the headaches you've heard about people working
with contractors typically has to do with fixed price projects and on the other side of the table you're
the one who contracted out an $800 project you're going to try to squeeze out every single bit of value
out of that as you can probably argue later down the line that your specifications actually said that
they should do more and more and more.
So you have two forces working in opposite directions and they're not working towards each other which
is the way they should because you both should be on the same page.
You want to create the best product and not just fulfill the requirements that you've written to the
best you can.
At the end of the day getting a cheap project bid is not worth the chance that the freelancer or the
contracting firm ends up losing interest of the project or ends up bailing on it.
If you notice on freelancer dot com they list out the completion rate because they have so many freelancers
they have people who underbid everyone else and then what you'll notice is an average completion rate
might be 70 percent.
So what happens if you're that 30 percent and can really kind of screw up your project and it can really
add months to your timeline for launch.
On the other hand we have the option of paying per hour.
Obviously the advantage of per hour is you don't have to have the same kind of stress between you and
the contractor.
They know that whatever effort they put in is going to get paid.
So there are going to focus on making the product as good as possible because they know that if they
put an overtime hours they're going to get paid for it.
Per hour projects also make it such that you don't have to stick to your requirements to the T because
the requirements are helpful for the developer to understand what they're building.
But it's also to help them understand what is getting paid for and what isn't They're paying per hour.
You can very easily and fluently add things to your specifications and you also don't need to make a
very long packet of information for them because you know that whenever they have questions about what
to build you can answer it at that time.
So if the idea of what you're trying to build isn't 100 percent concrete you can instead opt to use
a per hour agreement and then spend less time upfront building your requirements and your specifications
and more time as the project progresses.
This allows you an advantage that you can build something and as you see it getting better you can change
it.
You can modify it and you kind of tweak in whatever direction that you think you should go with it.
The obvious disadvantage of the paying per hour is that you don't know what your budget is going to
be.
And it happens a lot of the time that the budget will just get out from under you.
You expected to spend a couple of thousand dollars and you you know after a couple of months you know
$5000 that can happen especially you're not keeping tabs on what's being done how long it's taking it
makes it very hard upfront to know what it's going to cost at the very end.
Another disadvantage is that it inevitably is more expensive.
If I ask someone what their per hour wage is they're going to pitch me something that's way higher than
if I ask them how much a project would cost.
That is roughly equivalent of say eight hours of work.
It's just something about psychology and the way that people bid.
That makes it so that per hour prices are much higher than fixed price projects.
Another big disadvantage with paying per hour is that sometimes you don't know whether or not they're
being honest in how much they're charging you unless you have something set up like an oDesk team room
or at Elance work room.
It's very hard to say what is worth four hours of work and how much of that time was spent working and
how much time was spent not working.
You open the opportunity for someone to be a little frivolous with their billing.
I've known a lot of contractors who are otherwise reputable to take their invoices and add 20 percent
regardless getting into an argument with a developer over what should have taken eight hours or four
hours or 12 hours that is not an argument you want to have.
You honestly are just not in a good position to say how productive that person should be.
It's way too complex.
So how do I get around this.
I've come up with a solution that I think works quite well and I strongly suggest you do it too.
I do a hybrid.
I asked the contractor upfront to tell me not the project price but how many hours they think it'll
take them to do.
And then once I have the hours that's roughly the equivalent of what I'd see in a fixed cost price I'd
been negotiating rates slightly lower.
So if they say to take me 100 hours and I want $50 an hour what I can say is OK I'll approve it at thirty
five dollars an hour again.
Kind of takes in the advantage of being able to leverage this project against.
And once I see that you've approved a large portion of ours chances are they're going to say yes regardless
of what the actual rate ends up being.
You don't necessarily have to haggle them.
Sometimes you will lose a freelancer by doing this but the most more often than not they will stick
with you and you'll take a significant discount.
Now after the 100 hours has expired when I start to do is I do everything piecemeal.
So I say I want to add this section to it.
Now how long will that take you in terms of hours and then what they'll do is they'll pitch it back
to me in hours.
And so I'll say I want to add this feature and they'll say oh that's an easy one that'll take me three
hours and they know that three hours is in this case times 35.
So it's $105.
And so they know that they have to keep the per hours low otherwise it's not going to get approved.
And that's how I prevent people from running up the hours so if I said add this small feature and they
just said 10 hours it should be six.
They know that there's a chance it won't get approved.
And I will argue with them and I might say OK that's too complicated is there any way you can make it
simpler.
And virtually every time they can find a way of reducing it by 20 30 percent doing it incrementally
like that makes it such that the freelancer knows they have to be honest about the price and it makes
it much harder for them to inflate the numbers and also makes it much harder for the numbers to run
away from you because if I prove 100 hours I know exactly what that cost then I know how much is left
in my budget.
And then I start approving all eyechart sections saying OK four hours here eight hours here 10 hours
here and that's how I reach the remainder of my budget.
That's how I keep the freelancer engaged in honest.